[Music]
welcome to another episode of
conversations with Tom I am here with my
dear friend Chase Jarvis dude it is yes
much fun getting to know you so I'm
excited to have you likewise in a more
informal yeah and we're facing each
other versus like the chairs with the
audience and that yeah I love it
thank you for having me on the show oh
man for cooler for man I'm psyched I'm
excited it's been a lot of fun we're
talking about that just a second ago
it's nice to be able to to really have a
conversation and my goal is always to
push my own thinking so we were just
talking about Facebook and one of the
things that I think is problematic about
where Facebook is going there's a
documentary out I think it's called the
great hack the big hack the something
hack and it's talking about all of our
data and how it's being collected and
how one of the problems with the
Facebook algorithm and this I think is
the problem is that what they found is
things that are that rile people up that
gets lamonsoff yeah
the inflammatory stuff is like man it
[__] gets people commenting it gets
them on the platform and so that
platform has sort of become that yeah
and when I look at the difference
between comments say on my youtube
stream or comments on my Facebook
channel it's radically different and
there's something I've been thinking
about this lately I'm actually super
curious to get your take on this so I
I'm obsessed with neuroscience so I
always want to know like what the
neuroscience is behind something but
there is something about and maybe this
would fall into two what Jordan Pederson
calls the dark triad of personality
traits there's a reason that people use
the word dark on that so when I think
about inflammatory stuff there's just a
negativity to it so if a platform is
more and more inflammatory like even
though I feel the same instinct to like
go [__] rage out yeah it's not an
energy I like yeah so I'm like I'm just
gonna step back finish it yeah so maybe
here's something you like neuroscience
obviously and that the human biology is
negatively oriented out of survival bias
yeah and so maybe there's a lens that's
going on there with but if we if
Facebook priority if it's algorithm
prioritizes those things and it's
aartsen and then rewards that behavior
it's holding a candle or if it flame
leads yeah and it's not necessarily
dissimilar to if it bleeds it leads from
this you know 60s 70s 80s TV but the
part that it's we're hardwired to engage
in negativity bias so if it bleeds its
leads that's something bad happened to
someone else this is like it's because
it allows for her for an exchange of
ideas in a really inflammatory way so I
don't know but here's here's my question
and this is what's got me thinking about
this lately when I really think about
that it is not an emotion that I enjoy
yeah like I don't want to be involved in
something that makes me feel that way
that has that dark energy like it's it's
gross
even so anger has real something real to
it and it there are times where anger
has made me feel more powerful and so I
fully understand the range of human
emotion I totally get it yeah but
there's something about like wanting ill
for people like I don't know how else to
say like wanting your enemy to [__]
get it that I don't I don't share in
whatever makes people want that I shy
away from that socially like yeah I
think about building this business I
mean and I suppose this won't come as a
surprise to anybody and this is maybe
interesting to me because I'm trying to
be self-aware about the things that are
driving me and make sure that I'm here
in the right direction which is
something you talked about in your new
book yeah is just creating this company
I see how if I used inflammatory
techniques I would grow faster yeah but
when I think about what neurochemical
marinate in exactly what I post so I
literally don't understand yeah I I
think for the people who are more and
whatever is underpinning the desire for
growth or recognition or come up and sir
whatever the label is that that
outweighs what they want to bathe in
every day their neuro chemistry we can
there's probably a thread to pull on
there but I think that's probably what
you're tapping into is like you know you
can look at that you know like
and I don't like how it makes me feel
there are times when I will just be
holding my phone and not conscious of
holding my phone and even that timming
is gross yeah I get that I liked when
you talked about that in your book
you're saying alright you got a time
machine my rules go with me and I forget
was frita is that the caller yeah yeah
you're with her and she's like should I
go and paint or do I go to deal with the
car and you're like you know that's a
very easy thing for me to prioritize and
understand about her word right given
given that context from if from a
distance yeah which is is pretty
interesting and I want to pull on the
thread of what you're saying that
there's probably a thread to pull there
and I think the thing that makes me
really interested in this is thinking
about like personality types and how
much of this is like hardwired how much
of this is is some people actually want
to marinate in that and how much of it
is that that it is just the the human
survival instinct and it's universal to
all of us right and so your your book
makes a pretty bold it has a pretty bold
base assumption so I find when to
articulate intelligent people disagree
there's usually a disconnection on a
base assumption yeah and the base
assumption that your book is predicated
on is something that I'm really thinking
a lot right now partly because I'm
writing my own book and it has its own
set of base assumptions and the base
assumption that your book has is that
basically creativity isn't a skill it's
I think you call it a habit or a routine
habit so how much do you practice how
much do you really really think that
anybody could and do you think anyone
could get as good as you I think that's
my real question at photography which is
your specific discipline I think we all
have tendencies and we have skill sets
but I think part of the problem is the
definition of creativity that most
people chuck around on a regular basis
is the one that's a base assumption on
the the negative side of my argument of
the argument that a counterpoint to my
book would make which is like what wait
a minute I'm not going to be as good at
this well maybe I'm not as good a Potter
or maimie night guys good at Archer
maybe I'm not as good at building
businesses but the underpinning the
underlying creativity
is unquestionable we've all got it it's
what differentiates us you like
neuroscience it's what differentiates us
from every other species on the planet
we are uniquely able to put disconnected
ideas together to form something new and
useful you know you could argue that
that like chimps can do that and build
tools but there's a limited capacity
there and and for what we know right now
that this is a distinguishing
characteristic we are literally creating
machines that is what we're that is what
we do and to me that that whether I'm
better at photography there's aptitude
there are environmental there's a
million different things and I'm not
actually arguing that we can both be the
same quality photographer I'm saying
that we've all got creativity as a base
characteristic of what it means to be
human not dissimilar to language like if
you study Chomsky or anything you can
say language is part of what has helped
us helped our universe the human
universe happened and my assumption in
the book is that it was basically there
are three assumptions one is that every
person has creativity in it here's the
baseline litmus test for this ask any
first-grade classroom who wants to come
to the front of the room and draw me a
picture a hundred percent of the hands
go up 100 percent because there's no
judgement there's no there's and they
haven't been programmed or it's it's
really early on in their programming
rather is probably a better way of
saying it and we haven't trained it out
because we think it's cute so there's
this everybody's it yep I want to do it
it's fun I enjoy it it's expression
that's native in human in the same way
like a kid talks and you're like oh well
same way that most able-bodied people
will walk when a kid falls down 50 times
they don't say oh yeah I guess my kids
not a walker you know we just don't say
that we just like okay great you keep
doing it and imagine if we did that with
creativity so the that's one base
assumption is that so well let's go a
little deeper on that yeah so you're
saying that there's something inherently
pleasurable or fulfilling about the
creativity what is it about creative
expression that is is so important that
you want to make sure everybody sort of
Rico alessa's around that and becomes
that first grader again and goes up to
the chalkboard
yeah it to me it's as fundamental as
nutrition it's as fundamental is that
well yes yes interesting and I think
that's true
sort of biologically in survival but
also in joy and pleasure I think I want
to get through my three assumptions
before we go too deep on any one so that
assumption is that everyone's creative
when you see it empirically we feel it
in our bones when we make something even
if we don't love the outcome we feel
there's a sense of like okay great you
can see people like oh it feels good in
my gut right even just like it felt good
to do this to express myself to make
something the thing to is that this is a
characteristic that is moldable and
adaptable it's a habit that it's just
like I'm less adaptable in that it you
will improve in your output yes you will
and you will get just like a muscle it
is in muscle it is a practice not a
product and if you use it it will get
stronger so I mean that's why I think
it's it's very I use a biological
concept of a muscle because it's an
anatomical right define stronger for me
are you saying that your output will be
more interesting to other human beings
it will be of a higher quality or your
level of joy will be higher I believe
all of those things are amplified okay
so that's premise 2 and premise 3 if you
buy you know point one in the argument
by point two the argument point three
the argument is that in the act of
creating on a regular basis using your
muscles you actually there's a cognition
that happens an awareness that you have
agency so in creating small things on a
daily basis whether to photograph a meal
a business a lemonade stand anything
you've just made something and the
making of something in that small way
it's the same muscle that we use to make
our life so it's just creativity at a
different scale same set of muscles
different time horizon different you
know daily operation different lens if
you're talking about a camera to move
different aperture but the muscle is the
same muscle it's all creativity and
that's why people get bound up
in is this an art book I'm sure yeah if
it will supercharge all of your creative
skills you'll become a pure painter
become a better painter if you're
building a business you'll be a better
at building businesses but it's also
it's like a manual for life it is like
the people that you aspire to be like or
admire or would say have some sort of
success creativity is a core capability
they have acknowledged it
they have strengthened that practice and
it is driving is making what they are
doing possible it's really interesting
so is there something in there about so
going back to your first grader they go
up to the board it sounds to me like
when you said maybe they're just so
early in their got I forget the exact
word rogram
yeah the programming perfect so the
that's a softball there before you do
thank you that so as people are getting
programs from a beaten out of them
through the traditional education system
you talked a lot about this previously
that you were just sort of on a track
when you were a kid sure without even
really thinking about it so when I think
about human flourishing is I'm guessing
that sort of where you're going with
this idea sort of everything in your
life has been geared towards that is
some of this a thesis on the the sort of
creativity destruction mill that is sort
of the classical education shares here
in the US where it's like you're taught
to stay in line and do what you're told
and all that stuff so like it's only
it's only partly on purpose there are
it's it's also convenient it's you know
it's it's it especially it's based on
the schooling systems based on a
Prussian model that is literally modeled
after a factory where you put widgets in
one end you move them through a system
at the same rate and then ideally at
that they come out the other end with
the same skills at the same level doing
the same things and that's very
efficient in a world where the the the
highest ideology is the factory and what
we have now we have evolved beyond the
factory that as a means of production as
the most efficient way to make something
for example and so the system has to
change I don't
there's someone sitting in a room
somewhere the puppetmaster saying no no
we got it
schools have to stay this way I think
certainly that is a that is factual and
that it's an easy way to control people
and you give them all the same
information you feed them all the same
thing but I don't think that that that's
not actually a corollary to the book
it's not a trashing of the educational
system I I have done a lot of schooling
my wife was a teacher I went to public
schools it's just a reality of the
system it's like a byproduct of pop
culture or mass culture I also throw a
similar set of stones at at the at
employment at the job universe and and
the work force and it's
counterproductive to have someone who
doesn't sit down shut up use a
number-two pencil go to you know start
at this job at this time go to work for
40 years
get the gold watch retire fit into this
system that then government knows how to
quantify and qualify and can tag you and
put you in a box so I just think that
that's it's I'm not really trying to
attack I don't want to spend a lot of
time attacking school and I want to
spend a lot of time attacking the world
those are just the way they are this is
very practical it's them we're in a free
market that's what happened mostly free
and this is a new rule book this is the
black box that the people that you look
at how they have sort of managed it
having figured and I've basically made
every mistake you can in the book
hundreds of thousands in student loans
disappointed every major figure in my
family parents included grandparents
friends like lost a ton of money like
did did all of the things and yet here I
am I'm okay and it's part of the the to
me a an opening if you will of the black
box of how everybody that you look up to
and admire has deconstructed their
success and it all follows a really
similar pattern that is available to us
all starts with creativity we use it as
a muscle and then if you think you can
if you can start to manage creativity on
a small scale with us with a small C and
creativity with a capital C the ability
to create the living in the life
and the ark that you want is more within
your reach than ever before that's super
interesting so let me see if I
understand all this so the punchline is
basically we get there's no evil man
behind the curtain but we get our
creativity beaten out of us we all have
it as a kid we all have the propensity
for it it is like a muscle you can
develop it you could get better not only
at the art that you're creating but you
can also get better at a genetic be
agency perfect at having the creativity
and exploring that and doing things that
are creative and the punchline to all of
that is it's basically the you wouldn't
use the word antidote but it's the way
to counteract some of the realities that
we are the consequences of the reality
in which we live which is a school
system that is making less creative a
job way of being that's making you less
creative which is diminishing your or
your flourishing and so taking something
whether it's taking photos or building a
Gundam robot or whatever you're doing
something creative every day yep that's
going to allow you to go from small see
creative to big see creative to begin to
like plan out your life boom okay
there's a couple of corollaries a little
small twist in there I won't go into it
but I think I'm gonna I'm gonna put an
asterisk in there which is this does not
mean you have to quit your day job this
does not mean you have to smoke as a
cigarette then move to Perry you don't
have to paint you don't have to it is
really about the intention of just
awareness of creating and putting
yourself back into that awareness as
much as possible so I'm I'm betting that
the whoever's listening watching the
show right now that 90s north of 90%
have taken a photograph with their phone
in the last 24 to 48 hours and even if
it was a park photograph of the parking
spot at the grocery store so you
remembered where you parked or the
airport or whatever and you know if we
just shifted a moment and pause just for
a millisecond and acknowledge that this
is an act of creativity that making
dinner like you don't have to have a
room that's the painting room and pull
out your paints and you know you don't
have to find an extra 30 minutes all
these things are in the same way that
like carve
time out to work out or to plan your
nutrition or how all those things have
amplified value when you do at the
baseline it's just this awareness of
creativity and doing more of it
acknowledging that it's a muscle and
that this path this muscle not only is
it an antidote but that it's the most
powerful function that a human can do
that plus love interesting okay that was
a curveball there with love so this is
this is not it's like I don't talk a lot
about love but I just think it's a
powerful function in our inner cognition
and our you see love like a process as
well can we make it bigger better faster
stronger I don't know I didn't write a
book about love I just I just know it's
powerful just from my own experience but
well I'll just say it's to me we I'm
happy to stay with creativity but I just
it is creativity is like that moment
this is a line in the book when Dorothy
steps out of black-and-white Kansas into
Technicolor and Munchkinland and when
you turn that on and it's literally like
you start to see possibility in the
quantum field for example I know you
like quantum lights it's like when
you've realized that you've created
something and you've done that and then
you shaped something and another thing
and another thing you start to look at
the journey that you have a head as
doable as possible and if you didn't
make anything you would have like by
contrast sometimes that's a good way to
learn things are to test the program
right by contrast if you're not actually
accomplishing a goal if you're not
moving if there's no progress right a
bike it's very hard to ride a bike
without moving forward right
creativity is X this at this act of
moving forward and you can still be
still in mindful I want to respect the
Eastern tradition it's not about
accomplishing but it is about agency and
realizing that even if your aspiration
is to be still you had to realize at
some point that you were capable of
making yourself still that is a creative
act so I will one I want to get back to
love I'm not gonna let you look that
easily with that once you're [__]
interested but I do want to talk about
what I'm saying about about moving
forward sure so
that to me the thing that I really
struggle with in creating impact theory
and all the stuff that we're doing is I
don't want to [__] people I really
want the no [__] answer of what it
takes to live a fulfilling life that
I'll call my punchline okay now I think
that an absolute cornerstone of a
fulfilling life is the ability to what
you just called moving forward you have
to be able to say okay there's this
thing that I want I'm gonna go and get
better at it and then I'm gonna be able
to actually do things in the real world
so the thing I talk about all the time
is skill acquisition sure and what I
want to impress upon people is skills
have utility so there's there is no
reason to get a skill to tick a box
there is only a reason to get a skill to
actually be able to do something so I am
NOT using this example in the context of
creativity being a muscle I'm just
saying for you fair enough getting good
at photography was a way for you to get
checks from some of the biggest
companies in the world to send you
around to do things that are
extraordinary that you would not have
been able to do if you didn't get really
[__] good at photography for sure
like you even talked about you dad has
this great eye as a penciler but it's
like he never made a career to that now
I don't know if he never made a career
out of that because he never got that
good or if he just didn't pursue it but
I know that you're never going to have a
career at that thing unless you actually
get that [__] good yeah so like my
obsession in life dude is how [__]
malleable are we yeah and I for a long
time I sort of accidentally thought and
talked like we were blank slates though
I never actually believed that I think
there are just things that are
fundamental to human being and and there
are sort of traits and tendencies that
we're never going to be able to escape
but the more that I go down this road
the more that I'm like a little freaked
out by the notion of free will maybe
isn't even really a thing the fact that
there's like all this sort of underlying
stuff that is different from person to
person to person and some of it is Oh
God like they're just gonna be some
people that are better at some things
than others
yeah that is not a judgment on their
worth as a [__] human and that's one
of the reasons that I talk about this
dark energy is so many people that talk
about this stuff they have some [__]
dark energy about them
I want beautiful things for every
[__] buddy yeah because I want to be
in that beautiful energy I want to think
about that which is why
gonna get back to love great but it's
like how malleable are we really like is
you you've looked at so many people
trying to like live a creative life or
do what you do and you must look at some
of them and I say following statement
with a caveat I don't want them all to
win yeah I want to be convinced sofa and
badly run out with her but my gut
instinct is some people just suck at
photography sure you might suck a
photography but it doesn't sucking in
photography might it's not it's not an S
it's as necessary and sufficient that
you actually don't love it right you can
suck a photography and love it and why
wouldn't that be enough it's a great
[__] question so I will give you the
answer it that is absolutely true and I
really hope people end up there based on
the potential mistakes I have made with
my own belief system in my own values
yeah I love painting really really enjoy
it like the act of painting except for
the fact that I'm not good at it and so
how many hours you get behind the canvas
fair very good question I will call it
that was written 200 No yeah less than a
thousand pressure so a thousand percent
I could get way way way better yeah but
there is something that I'll call
disproportionate returns so whenever I
put energy into verbal skills I get a
disproportionate return on my time
totally that's so you have that's
because you're inclined to that we're
all inclined to think when you say
inclined what do you mean you're saying
that you're born with it I think you
were like what I really think is you got
certain rewards as a kid go back to you
think we're blanks like no I do think
that we were we are because a blank
slate would not imply language and I'm
we're Laine Thompson yeah the rest yeah
have you read Steven Pinker's book blank
slate no but I know enough about Pinker
to be able to probably argue around it
but interesting oh please yeah tell me
because I plus B of language so my
background I was very happy to drop out
of the PhD in philosophy program along
with all lots of other things in my life
to become a photographer but we got too
many things in the air right now so
I think we're not a blank slate I think
there are some things like we're
hardwired to do you could call it
biology and that is like the negative
bias survival bias language I'm
specifically at what was the the threat
that we were following what am I really
trying to figure out it is how malleable
you then regard now I get unless I'm not
talking about the book I think your
presence on the book that's why I wanted
to say yeah I understand it okay now I
want to go somewhere else so as kids I
think a lot of our psychology is molded
through early wounds where we were
either rewarded or chastised and you
were rewarded for being articulate and
at the dinner table at the birthday
party whatever and so that you have
again it's not you might still get joy
from painting and you said you're not
good at it
I would also say you haven't you you
could probably get much better yeah but
you might have a disposition that
Orient's you toward verbal skills and I
I don't know too many people who hate
the thing that they're great at because
of we're social animals so I actually I
make a point in the book like you have
two things in life figure out we were
supposed to do and then do the thing and
the thing that you're when you're
figuring it out certainly what I my
experience is looking backwards and this
is there are times I talk about hearing
the call the creative calling and the
call is not necessary to be a poet in in
Berlin the thing it might be building
businesses it might be cooking it could
be writing computer code and when you
stepped on that path that's another big
metaphor in the book it felt what I call
effortless hard work you've it the hard
work was there but it was joyful and you
had just enough ability just enough you
could see yourself doing the thing which
creates propulsion and momentum and to
me that is the the the the tranche under
which you're sort of are
my is everybody good at everything no
well now I'll get it everything because
we have childhood wounds and we have a
vision of ourselves I'm not I'm asking a
different question because I know we're
not all good at everything I don't think
anyone on the face of the earth would
ever take that stance but can we get
good at anything yeah I think we can get
more dependent obviously there's the
definition of good yeah maybe I'll even
push that a little bit can we get
world-class at anything no interesting
you would have gone with you can get
good just but you stopped shy of world
class yeah because I put world class in
the top 1% okay you know it's like and I
don't think it's our mission to try and
be world class I don't think we have a
disposition to try and get good at
things that we don't love because the
because of the the social animal
component to our psychology our biology
we're you know there's those things are
chemicals that are released when you get
rewarded for you get a pat on the back
you get some drugs going in your system
from mother nature and so that biology
sort of predisposes that we're gonna
have a we're gonna drift towards things
that bring us joy and that we're good at
and those things tend to coincide more
over time that becomes a rut that
becomes a neural pathway sure can you
break yourself out of it like I was in
the top just you know small teeny little
handful of people are the best in the
world that commercial photography making
you know huge visions come true for big
brands for high dollars that got seen by
a lot of people and I can still burn out
on that I don't have to continue to do
it I was in what they would call a rut I
didn't want to do it anymore and so I
had to expand my consciousness to do
some other things like build a business
around helping tens of millions of other
people do that and that was not easy
this is my painting maybe I stepped in
I'm 200 hours in I feel like I'm 200
years in the dark circles under my eyes
here but and that's part of I think if
I'm trying to couch this in some of your
but what I know about you and your
passion for learning and the fact that
it says always be learning or something
up in the green room up there like
that's joyful the
grass learning even if you don't want to
become real class so I don't you know I
don't know quite where you want to take
this but I do think that based on our
experiences in life we have felt what it
was like to be on the path whether it
was telling jokes in second grade or it
was Foursquare on the playground in
eighth grade or band or you know the
first time you made a meal and your
grandma said oh my gosh
you know Jody you you are so good at
pastries and then you know you felt
really good you know like then you
started thinking of yourself in that
term and and you know fast forward ten
years if you're trying to figure out
what to do and you feel sad inside
sometimes you go home and you make some
nice cinnamon rolls so yeah it's
interesting to me what where I'm I'm not
necessarily going anywhere but the the
reason that this question remains so
all-consuming to me is I don't think
we're blank slates so I might gut
instinct one of my earliest memories is
faking not seeing Easter eggs so that my
sister would win the Easter egg hunt and
because I knew it meant more to her than
it did to me I am wired to enjoy seeing
other people win that doesn't mean that
I don't want to win it doesn't mean that
I don't want to be the best it's just
that I really love seeing other people
win as well so like I gravitate towards
being on the team and winning with other
people and like being able to share that
is so much more interesting to me yeah
so I think that that is a predilection
that I was probably born with
understanding that I wish we were blank
slates and you'll get why in a second
but I don't think that that is true so I
had a predilection that Preta Lucien
then was fed by experience so I'm sure
because my mother is very much like this
like I was definitely rewarded as a kid
for being kind to other people and so
that would have been something my mom
would a lavish praise on me for doing
like oh my gosh you let your sister win
like that's so kind and thoughtful and
you know so definitely there was also
then the reinforcing of it and when I
think about okay there's things that I
have a predilection for that then were
rewarded that I then invested
energy into and it becomes a neural
pathway like you were saying so that's
the background to why I'm so driven to
answer this question and why it'll it'll
almost certainly be one of the driving
forces behind this entire show is me
trying to learn as much as I can to get
to the following in 30 seconds or less
to be able to change the course of
someone's life forever by being able to
say some magic [__] word I get that
this probably isn't possible so people
need to write me about it I'm just
saying like when you take it out to it's
like really what do I want to do I've
worked in the inner cities a lot I've
seen extraordinary people absolutely
waste away and be [__] destroyed by
their environment and I'm trying to as
fast as I can undo a lot of shitty
programming to get them on the right
path I can't babysit everything I can't
be their energy I can't want it for them
these are very painful lessons by the
way that I did not acquiesce to easily
I'm [__] in my 40s now and I'm only
just now beginning to let go of the
death grip of if I spend enough time
with somebody that I could help them and
realize and it just doesn't [__]
scale yeah so it's like I'm always
looking for that insight man when some
like if somebody has some part of that
magic formula of like knit or nope get
them to pain every day and like that's
the thing that's the breakthrough moment
then I'll [__] kidnap people if I
have to and put them in a room and make
a paint like whatever it is but I I am
so compelled to understand the human
mind yeah to understand human behavior
to understand the layer of culture like
I feel like if I can understand that
well enough I'll know what's [__] so
I can avoid that right and I'll find out
what actually works so I can put more
time and energy into that because I have
dedicated my entire life due to a
[__] thesis and that thesis is you
start with a story you hit people with
narrative you give them [__] robots
and stories Dragonball Z like whatever
you hit them when they're a kid Disney
obviously is a perfect example for this
you give them Spider Man and Thor and
Iron Man you draw them in with [__]
emotion and storytelling you plant ideas
in their mind and then my thinking is
and nobody's done this before that you
graduate them then to like the
can read this book go paint go take
photographs go code whatever your
creative thing is like and let me lay
the stuff out for you because right now
I am so [__] distressed by how much
the zip code you were born into the
number one predictor dude the number of
walking gnarly gnarly yeah so like I
could I wouldn't like this either
because I don't think I have a very high
IQ but I could at least get behind that
if you had a high IQ no matter where
you're born you're gonna find your way
sure but it doesn't even seem to be that
it seems to me you can really [__]
people up so my hope is if you can
really [__] people up how much can you
very rapidly get them on a path where
they can do red [__] well I gotta take
take grain of salt with what I'm about
to say so just like pinch the salt and
it salt bay that [__] right now so it's
I talked earlier about making a lot of
mistakes and I think those mistakes were
largely correlated with trying to find
social acceptance I'm a hard-charging
type a kind of just cliche to the bone
and I hate it and yet because you get so
[__] my up leaking my own sister and
it's just I don't know there's a lot of
negative characteristics around that
kind of a personality trait I think and
but as soon as I acknowledge that I
started working on this but it's been
good but kind of yeah to disappoint
everybody in your life virtually
everybody and well let's use disappoint
with a low D low to small D okay and to
also still to be fair that was the
hardest thing I did was acknowledge that
I'm a creator in a world that
historically and I think this is
changing and I'm trying to this is the
stake I want to put in the ground is
that in a world that used to think of
creativity and or art as a nice-to-have
helpful playful naive even but now with
the premise that that I've personally
experienced that I've watched in sitting
down in my show like this with a almost
200 of the world's top performers the
world's greatest entrepreneurs thought
leaders create
and numerous disciplines the trait that
I'm I believe is that we are of course
we're creative machines and if we can
unlock that aspect of it of our selves
that it's not a nice to have
it's like nutrition it's like air it's
like oxygen it is it is our superpower
just and yet it's manifesting itself in
really interesting ways look at the best
companies in the world used to be the
ones that had the best supply chain or
the before that it was the ones that we
don't need I don't need to do a
regression but like Apple Computer
wildly creative very you know everyone's
else's digging their zagging it's just
also a trite example but I'm trying to
use a trite example because it's like
okay you start to see that creativity is
not just a nice to have and when I have
experienced it personally I started to
see this bubbling up in culture it was
the hardest thing I've ever done to
disappoint all the people who want me to
be a doctor or a lawyer a professional
athlete or all the things that were
socially acceptable to become a
photographer so it was hard for me
knowing go back to your inner city think
I was born white I was born in America I
was born in the 70s I was you know I
have virtually every privilege my
parents are still together to this day
male and it was the hardest thing I've
ever done of course it's gonna be harder
for other folks who have less advantage
that being said if that were easier if
it were easier to acknowledge this part
of ourselves culturally a norm not
thought of as a nice-to-have not naive
and my are you in the book very simply
that this is the most practical thing to
be able to figure your way out of
whatever into something different
by putting two things that used to not
go together together to form something
new and useful that is ultimate power
what do you think is the purpose to life
Oh Nintendo I think some sort maybe
unexpected is very um what I think is
the purpose so not a non sequitur this
this knows exactly related to what
you're saying yeah well I'll kick it
back to you because you get you got an
answer the tip here to I do
so but the reason I'm asking is because
I I am trying to be very conscious that
I have an agenda and I push that [__]
agenda but it has everything to do with
the world I want to live it or not
necessarily the world everyone else
wants to live in so I believe the
purpose of life is to find out how many
skills you can acquire that have utility
and then put that utility to the test
and service of something bigger than
yourself so basically get good at [__]
that matters to you and go [__] make
something awesome okay now that's
something awesome can be a company
that's something awesome can be art
that's something awesome be the greatest
school teacher ever it doesn't matter to
me what you do notice I said make
something yeah none here's the thing I
buy into the whole creativity thing I
[__] love it I think okay go hundred
percent like I'm on board with your book
I think your book is [__] great I
think people should read your [__]
book I think that you're right on the
money so my thing is like it's
definitely a piece of something yep and
now I want to plug it into like the the
bigger picture the like where do we go
from here kind of thing
okay and so when I was hearing you talk
I thought okay it's interesting cuz you
were talking about there's problems to
being a type a hard-driving or a person
and I just thought I don't know that
that's true but that may one it's not
true from the perspective of what I'm
trying to create a world that I want to
see all of that it may very well be
perfectly true because you may be trying
to live a different life and my one of
my favorite quotes is from Ray Dalio
wrote a book called principles gotta
read largest hedge fund in the [__]
world peanuts amazing and he said look I
don't know that the way that I've lived
my life is the right way maybe living a
stress-free life is actually the way to
go I just know that the way that I've
lived my life is only way I could have
done it I thought that is exactly how I
feel like I cannot I have no interest in
that's a more truthful thing I've no
interest in stepping outside of my bias
on this yeah
so why do you want to back off being a
type-a hard charger just because I think
it creates blind spots can you be real
specific sure if we are only one way I
believe it is largely based on the
stories that we've told ourselves and
you define type a now I think I was
using sort of a trite colloquial like
what was the thing in you that you
didn't like or that you thought had
negative associations or it had real
problems in your life um I think that it
is it potentially creates blind spots
when there's only one speed one of the
things I realized I crave is intensity
and if you're only if you crave it and
you're able to supply it to yourself and
you continue to get good results and
you've been into over-index on it is it
fair to say that there's something other
than intensity that you might be missing
out on that is has to do with the rich
balanced whole meaningful fulfilled life
and so to me that is that was for
example through the lens of what you're
just asking about that was a blind-spot
that I would be missing out on some
things and what I found is a couple
things one that this that that belief
was continually fulfilled and escalated
by the story I told myself
and speaking of narratives and how were
hardwired for story when I started
telling myself as a different story and
I started providing some space and some
tools to do something other than that
and I'll just use a very simple example
of meditation that my life didn't get
less awesome it got more awesome and you
know Tim Ferriss and I have talked a lot
about it he in in his book tools for
Titans I had a chapter in there and we
talked about meditations on myself and
Rick Rubin were the two people that got
Tim to take up Transcendental Meditation
and when I think the way Tim articulates
it was way that I felt it as well which
is I've been rewarded my whole life for
intensity being good at whatever I would
want to focus on and
it's rewarded and if I meditate and that
might take away my edge that might take
away the very thing that created all
this and whatever this is right whatever
I was happy with in my life
and what I realized is that intensity in
some places in some ways in some shapes
was a huge anchor and so the thing that
that experiment that thought experiment
if we're talking about here and my
actual experiment realized to me that
there are there's more than one way and
I am NOT a one-dimensional person and
the story that I tell myself should it
should expand to include some other
aspects can you get specific I have
obviously guesses as to what precisely
you're talking about but so here I guess
I'll give you my guess and tell me if
I'm right so in always being intense and
always going hardcore to be the greatest
photographer to have the biggest
business or build the biggest school or
whatever there was a and now I'm
painting you with my brush great there
was a neural Armenia painter by the way
yes that's I am far less than mediocre
painter dude I'm a god-awful paint me
when I had 10,000 hours no yeah that
that is a very first thing on this
though I have I have my tent outdoors
thinking about some of these idea so my
my guess is that there was a
neurological state a neurochemical state
may be a better way to say it that you
were not able to experience that you
have found intensely pleasurable may be
the wrong word valuable valuable perfect
so that you found valuable and living
using your words a balanced more or you
didn't surround it but you said the
holistic or fulfilling fulfilling life
now when you say that is it is it a
sense of relaxing of letting go would
you use words like surrender like what
is that state and does it come with like
is it you recently posted photos of
somewhere in Washington which I can't
believe I'd never even heard of [__]
stunningly beautiful obviously out in
the middle of nowhere or the sunset you
could just feel you guys unwind
relaxing is that the kind of state that
had previously been absent from your
life and now makes your life better I
think that might be too far but let me
try and maybe just click back a couple
notches and it was the thing that it
gave me was awareness flowing down yeah
and I don't even say like slow has a
connotation that's the opposite of fast
and then you place value on one of those
two spectrums so I just think awareness
and when you're in your I don't know if
I'd call it an addiction because that's
that word you're gonna pick up and run
with so I'm just gonna I'm gonna
navigate around that but when you're in
your story then you I think you end up
going all-in on that and there's a
benefit of flow state of a you know
forgetting about all these things but
it's not only positive that's pause
that's positively oriented around
productivity and accomplishment and all
the things that flow state you know good
feeling is good neural chemistry but
there's also an awareness as I'm just
gonna not fully juxtapose those two
things but just like put awareness in
there as it feels good to be aware this
is this moment feels good being aware of
my desire or my ability or my fear that
you know what what's what's the
mechanism that's operating underneath is
it fear of not being loved because if
I'm not the best at a thing you know I
don't know but that's why I don't want
to try and actually do the work to
juxtapose it perfectly but it's just
something other than the neurochemical
pathway that you've been programmed for
there's other cool [__] off the road you
know yet to me the the thing that I
worry about is all right so have this
message I put it out and put it out very
aggressively and I always worry that
people don't hear the part about you
have the the goal of all of this is
neuro chemistry plain and simple
so the punchline of life the definition
of success to me
is not money it's not fame it's not
glory it is it is entirely neuro
chemistry how do you feel about yourself
when you're by yourself the the neuro
chemicals that your Oh wash and do they
feel good is it like positive and
uplifting we just it it's a lighter
feeling it's it is as far as I can tell
as close to objective objectively being
better as you're going to get to but to
to get to that state via OneNote is
almost certainly never going to happen
play sure there's a great way of
thinking about it I want to I want the
symphony correct I don't just want my
one C sharp which is very intense and
I'm very good at playing that note over
and over yeah and if you can listen to
yourself if you if you you talk a lot
about intuitions if you listen to I
wouldn't call it intuition but maybe
that's a great word for it I would just
say it starts to feel shitty like you
you don't feel right anymore like I
always tell the team here if you need a
random Tuesday off take a random Tuesday
off like [__] listen to yourself yeah
it I'm gonna come to you and expect you
to get your job done at a certain level
but if you're not listening to your own
body if you're not experiencing life in
a way that is awesome like this is all
for naught yeah like it wouldn't make
any sense for us to implode an entire
group of people trying to help other
people if like you don't have those you
know here at the company are [__]
miserable like it doesn't make any sense
so my thing is like I really believe
people should go hard why should because
I think that there are objective truths
to the human condition about what is
gonna make you feel good yeah but I
think the progress is one of them I
think going hard is one of them I think
doing hard things is one of them sure
and I think if you don't do these things
just like if you're not creative you you
are wired for this [__] and if you're
not doing it then you're not gonna get
the neurochemical result that you want
that I will say is success right that
you're feeling good about yourself and
you're by yourself you were awash in
chemistry that makes you feel good it's
that lighter energy that we talked about
so I think you have to do those things
but if you're charging hard like that
and your body starts going I'm not
having fun right now and you just keep
[__] doing it it's like I get it like
I'll always push a little bit extra just
to make sure that like I'm
I'm not just being lazy because I also
know that I have a propensity to be lazy
yeah but and I'll use cold showers as an
example so 99 times out of 100 a I don't
want to take the cold shower and be I'll
try to I'll come up with excuses but one
time out of a hundred
I'm actually like no I really like today
what I need to live the fulfilled life
that I want to live is to not take the
culture yeah I mean and when I know it's
not about laziness it's about like it's
about fulfillment or if you're sick yeah
I made that mistake I made that mistake
yeah don't do that
I even tried to research that one to see
cuz I was like I don't like taking cold
showers ever so I really feel like I
have an excuse to not take a cold shower
when I'm sick I looked it up
jury was out so I said [__] it alright I
got to take it because I don't want to
be making excuses I definitely felt
worse yeah so for anybody out there
wondering well part of what I love about
what you're the rant that you were just
on is the book it covers all of those
things that the value of risk the value
of hard work the value of giving
yourself permission to suck as a painter
is there's like because you went there
and you did a thing and you even if you
realize you don't do a thing and it
talks also about like when to quit so
all these aspects I've grounded
everything that you've just said and
fundamentally it's we're creating
something and you're either creating a
thing right now PowerPoint for work
Amil Sonata whatever or you're creating
your life and all of the things that you
just said are I would say aspects that
sit on top of creativity and I'm trying
to get to the bottom of it like let's go
to the foundation what is it is it
breathing no no it's not quite a
holistic enough is it nutrition no no
it's not quite is it you know that all
these other things that we think of is
foundational and that's really how I
arrived at creativity interesting so
you're putting creativity below
biological functions well I'm putting it
as a it is it is sort of part of what
the definition of being human is and by
ignoring
this creativity your your your giving up
on yourself Wow I don't know if I can
give you that one you're saying that
it's that fundamental do tell me what
you have done yeah you like progress you
like you listed a lot of stuff that
doesn't have creativity as an essential
element of those things well so I'll
answer that in a different way because
you're breathing which maybe if you said
breathing tongue-in-cheek I'd add I said
okay fair enough and I won't derail us
because again the only thing I would say
is if I haven't thought through it
enough to know if so don't breathe you
don't get to create day fair enough I
was just gonna say at the end of the day
people need to root I just taught a
class on this people need to root their
[__] in biology yeah like you you why do
you need to exercise because your body
has the same called mitochondria
mitochondria makes ATP without ATP your
cells actually die like they they die
they break apart they no longer holds
your form together you become dirt again
yeah so it's like there there is a very
real thing to be faced with we are and
and this is one of those depending on
what your baseline perspective is it can
be really [__] hard to talk to people
like if when I talk to somebody who
doesn't think that if they believe in a
ghost in the machine writer then I am
gonna sound like a crazy person because
all I'm ever trying to do is go I need
to understand the biology of that
because once I understand the biology of
it then I feel I feel like I can take
advantage of that so for instance if I
understand the biology of ATP then I'll
work out because I understand that I can
create more mitochondria if I create
more in mitochondria then I'm able to
not only make the energy system more
efficient but I actually create more of
energy because I've got more
mitochondria now I might not have come
to that conclusion if I didn't
understand the biology sure so and
speaking of that I'm gonna take us back
to love okay because when you said that
that was part of what made me so curious
is I don't I certainly would not be able
to explain the specific biology of love
but what I want to know is how much do
you think you can
if I wanted to use a romantic word I
would say manifest love if I wanted to
use a more grounded word I would say
connection if well no just like that you
can you can feel love like if you close
your eyes and I say imagine smiling sure
you can do that and you actually feel
something yeah even though you're just
imagining smiling so like to just
capture the sentiment of love so you
likened creativity and love is the the
two most powerful things I wish I could
remember the word you said but if
something like to do like we could do
love which I found very interesting is
that the right way of describing it
probably not and that's why you know I'm
kicking myself now that we're getting
critical that I was I was casual what
the word love but I do I do with all
your buttons there we go with all your
biology and mitochondria I want to ask
you a question and to me that's why
connection is a really good stand-in at
least for this you know in terms of
argument here are positioning do you
know that a human being a baby who's
recently born if they are not held they
will die yeah
it's bananas okay so how do you put that
in your mitochondria and smoke it and
smoke it well what's interesting is are
you saying is there something about when
I break it down to biology that bothers
you but no I'm stew sterile no I mean I
remember I was a scientist for the first
three quarters of my or for the first
half of my life and would you say that
there's is there some I'm reacting to
you saying how do you put that in your
mitochondria and smoke it so I'm trying
to figure out it sounds like there's
something maybe too cold no no to me
it's just it's it is a I'm looking at an
exception is there something mystical
about connection for you I don't know
this is what this is why I'm asking the
question so for me I don't have an
answer but I was curious what your
answer was so mine would be it while I
am not yet the person I want to be
because the person I want to be would be
able to give you the neuro chemistry of
that so I'm not yet that person but I
firmly believe that
it would be a pretty off-the-shelf thing
for a David Eagleman for instance to
explain where he could who's a
neuroscientist he could tell you exactly
what's happening the cascade of events
that causes you to secrete whatever it
is serotonin dopamine it's probably
there's three I think neuro chemicals
that are pretty implicated and lusher
forgetting the third one right now so my
gut instinct is that would be a pretty
easy thing for a certain type of person
to explain but here's the the fun of
life for me that I love this sort of
like almost mystical like not
understanding it as I think that when I
can grapple with the science of
something sure becomes a more malleable
thing for me right but without that like
it's still like you said earlier that I
like quantum physics now the thing that
I find interesting about quantum physics
is I don't pursue it in any meaningful
way whatsoever but it tickles a part of
my brain that I is makes it so clear
that there's something so fundamental
that I don't understand and I like that
sensation now I don't entirely know why
I like sensation but I find it deeply
pleasurable yeah and I get the feeling
that it's the same things that
astronauts have when they look back at
the earth and they think oh my god like
we're so insignificant but there's
there's a real there's a beauty to that
somehow there's no holder to that for
sure that's what I see in in quantum
physics is I'm so [__] stupid
compared to somebody who really
understands this stuff and I don't make
a value judgment on I'm just talking
like from an IQ my brain can't process
that sure I'm not being humble like I
and I would get better I would get let's
say 11 times better sure if I went and
studied and all that so I get it I'm I
haven't clocked my 10,000 hours but none
of that comes easy none of it is
intuitive it all seems so [__] weird
yeah but it gives me a beautiful feeling
headache' and a feeling of like well I
don't [__] understand this this is so
weird and it's how is it a particle and
a wave at the same time how does one
photon go through two slits this is
[__] weird
and then David Deutsch this whole thing
about oh you keep going with an infinite
number of slits it'll go through all of
them yeah so that is so crazy here yet
so beautiful so I love this sort of
majestic side yeah and and quantum
physics posits the mystical that's
ultimately what it's doing
are we defining mystical as we non-local
interactions the idea that a butterfly
flaps its wings on the other side of the
world then yes that does create a
hurricane on the other side like
non-local interactions I think it's
bells bells theory is you can make it up
I don't know yeah okay it's I think I
think it is I don't know but non-local
interactions basically like things that
are not connected in space when one
happens something a long ways away or in
some laboratory in a different room in a
different box again flips one way and
that flips up on the untangle Minh
that's crazy so I think the to use your
world your word like surprise delight
joy aww all these things that are just
like magnets in those places crazy in a
good way now here's the thing that I was
curious about and it says oh maybe a
little bit divergent it goes into the
philosophy of science which is all
science is ultimately consistently
proving itself to be wrong yes yes so
the most simple in interest the most
simple example that I can give is let's
just go to physics yeah we used to think
that Newton nailed it right things fault
or earth 8.6 it went 2
meters-per-second-square whatever and
and that worked really good for
everything they could measure around
Newton's time and you know 50 years
after and then oh no this is tiny guy
comes along and Einstein Einstein II in
physics comes along and says no no it's
not eight point two meters per second
squared because if you take you up an
aisle up in a plane and you you know
doesn't actually follow it at eight
point two meters per day I'm hoping
getting this right I'll remember my
eighth grade physics but that things
don't actually fall at that rate
it's just a little bit different by the
way if you covered this in eighth grade
your schools okay
maybe is college and then the the
quantum mechanics and ultimately all
these things are proving the thing that
came before it be inaccurate we don't
know [__] totally yeah and that it's a
constant realization that what you said
you knew
two weeks ago two months ago two years
ago two centuries ago is false right
what is false about the mitochondria
then your you can be so passionate about
it right now
yeah and it works good and I have a sigh
of a sign in my yard that says black
lives matter that no human is illegal
that science is real like you know I put
it on that level and yet you know math
even requires that we make up some rules
in order to play it but here's what's
interesting to me about science and I am
NOT a scientist manner so just this is
one man's follow my logic I think that
the best advice ever got is when you
don't know something well just tell
people here's my logic sure so my logic
about science is this science is the
quest to find out why we're wrong and
the second you stop asking I mean what
don't we know what's wrong here sure
that's not [__] science for sure like
saying this is this is definitive we
know this [__] oh and I think it was Max
Planck who said if you think that
science advances because people
recognize the truth of some new piece of
information you were wrong science
advances because the old guard dies yeah
and the new guard grows up believing it
to be self-evident and it's like what
the [__] if you know that's true why why
cling to share so dogmatically yeah so I
love the saying I have strong
convictions loosely helped so I have
strong convictions for sure because they
seem true like and one you have to
operate based on what you believe in the
moment based on the best information
available if if your dumbass sits
paralyzed because you know that we don't
know everything that's [__] stupid in
my opinion if your dumb ass is like I
could never be proven wrong and
therefore I'm closed-minded that's all
so stupid totally because to me this is
the answer and this is like if you not
to interrupt but I'm gonna I'm gonna
grab it here which is the ultimate what
I took out of one of my philosophy of
science classes in whatever whatever oh
yeah I wish I'm glad it wasn't rather is
exactly what you just said right there
and it's not that it's false its degrees
of false like it was it's not entirely
untrue it was true for what they knew at
the time and as the tools get better and
as knowledge expands and etc etc that
it's getting more refined
answer sometimes we do a 180 on things
but usually it's a linear progression
it's a curve that we're like oh we're
getting you could say we were getting
smarter so I don't want to has an
interesting idea a culture stacks man
yeah that we're getting smarter yeah
I'm really [__] interested by that
concept of standing on the shoulders of
giants and then what what are those
shoulders those shoulders our culture
and this is why like I'm I'm so [__]
afraid of like and that is the right
word I am I'm embarrassed to admit but
I'm so afraid of the culture wars
because it's so [__] dogmatic yeah
but when I think about that it does
matter it's like at some point if you're
doing something that doesn't uplift
people if you're doing something that
doesn't allow knowledge to stack and
carry on from generation to generation
like you're holding [__] back yeah like
that
that one really freaks me out and and I
hope people smarter than I get it
together and if I can figure out how to
disseminate a culture that's that's
really empowering to and honestly like
not to take it back to the book but
let's talk about the create no but
that's like but it to me
the books that I had experienced about
creativity were so inaccessible right it
was either Austin clans like see like in
ours which is amazing it's a long did
you just say Austin Kleon steal like an
artist it's an Austin as a friend any
wrote a cool book and it's about
creativity and it's a and he's got a
series of them that's like it's
beautiful and simple and but all the
other ones are so academic and you know
even like the fear of our art and fear
the artists way it's a lot about
doodling and the doing and the and it's
work bookie and and to me I wanted to
write I needed to write a book that I
felt like had was ruthlessly practical
and that's why the found a and I put it
so fundamental that creating and putting
things together gives you an in doing it
in small ways gives you the ability to
see to a not betray yourself and to
actually give yourself the ability to
have the living the life that you
believe you are capable on that how do
you betray yourself if you deny your
creativity I posit that you've betrayed
yourself because you'll never fully
discover the life that you could have
because you have the creativity to map
it out yeah or not not just to map it
out but to actualize it interesting you
know and it's I think to me it's also
very it has to be rooted in popular
culture like these are very I'm trying
to make it ruthlessly practical in a
world in a sea that thinks of it as
berets in Paris and poetry and it's not
those things sure it that is a subset a
teeny-weeny little subset of creativity
but it is this we are you know talk
about not being a blank slate we have
this creative plutonium in us that is
good for a thousand lives and if we just
like anything like you fuel that and it
gets more powerful you if it's a spark
and you blow oxygen on and it gets
brighter and to me to be able to think
of creativity is as so practical so
pragmatic is that's where the sort of
the bit flips and you're like oh wait a
minute I was told and we're not taught
this right we're certainly not taught
that we're given platitudes like you can
do anything but we're never told where
to point it and it's also if you
juxtapose again it's a good way to see
contrast is like oh painting or art or
creativity is so whimsical you're never
really actually told what to do
otherwise like play the stock market
science it's just that creativity it's
and and it's because go back to the
mystical thing it's just just got this
crazy power we don't understand it
sometimes it really works sometimes it
doesn't work so good some people handle
it some people don't
we just sort of like label it and so I'm
trying to in a very pop culture simple
way hold up the thing and look at it and
say crazy pragmatic crazy power what do
you mean when you say in a pop culture
way um just uses contemporary examples
like if you are creativity there's value
to creativity in and of itself but if
you want to for example progress to go
back to your word then
not sharing your creativity is going to
undermine your ability to progress not
just in skills but to take those skills
and put those skills to use like you
like skills and skills create your
ability to achieve or to manifest or
whatever the right word is and that's
why there's a huge piece in this book
about community and about there are
communities that you join that are
further along than you are where you can
tap into some juice and some mojo and
like oh I'm joining the photography
community or the neuroscience community
in your case and there's also the
community that you build around your own
work even if you're a blacksmith in
Jackson Hole Wyoming and your community
is the 10 restaurant tours that come to
you to hammer out your knives like it
doesn't it's not about having a million
Instagram followers it's but we are
social animals and taking your craft the
thing that you're creating and having it
be a part of something larger than you
is valuable in your word you would use
progress so I think part of when I say
it's it's couched in popular culture
it's like well these are this is it
there's the tactical it talks about cold
showers and here it talks about
permission to suck it talks about taking
swings it talks about managing risk like
an entrepreneur they're stories of fail
at my own failures my own massive
failures and the ways that people like
Richard Branson protect their downside
I'm not like we've painted failure as
this cute thing and sure you got to take
some swings but it'd be nice if you
didn't fail and here's some ways to
protect against that so it's just it is
tries to be a guide through that black
box
it was so hard and I used to not be
creative and now I'm I have a company
impact Theory and we have millions of
people that pay attention to what we do
great I want it necessarily it's nice
that now I've bought into the story the
arc of the story a and B and I want to
know what happened between a and B so
the book also is very tactical and like
here's literally the steps that one
would take it the book is written in a
framework so that it's a repeatable
creative process whether you're talking
about baking a cake or building a dream
life are you familiar with transcranial
magnetic stimulation
no I'm I've had a lot of cranial sacral
massage in my time so a little bit
different okay I get it so when I think
about creativity drum I naturally
gravitate towards the visual arts which
which may be a mistake but one of the
things that I am intrigued by is you can
take somebody and put one of these
devices up to their head and you aim it
at a certain place and zap them it shuts
off a part of their brain and then they
can draw better mmm which I find really
interesting inhibition yeah there's like
a shot of of I don't know kes amigos
tequila or something I mean is it well
they have very different effects but
yeah same idea so you've got the corpus
callosum which connects the two
hemispheres of the brain and some of the
new stuff coming out and brain sciences
like look it's [__] impossible to
tell you what region of the brain does
what but because it's it's deeply
complex yeah and it's like a lot of
different regions in a certain pattern
at a certain level of intensity gives
you a certain thought feeling emotion
whatever but the fact that the corpus
callosum is largely an inhibitory
pathway isn't really the right way to
think of it there's something there
about training for creativity about
there being possibly and and again
follow my logic I'd yeah you know what
I'm sorry but I just find this
particularly interesting so if
transcranial magnetic stimulation knocks
out a region of the brain and that is
what allows some people to be able to
drop better how much of the process of
becoming more creative is actually
turning things off whether it's part of
the narrative which may be a little bit
simplistic compared to the like true
neuroscience of it but you know how much
of that is gonna be an unlearning
process I don't know if you've thought
about that at all haven't I dude I dunno
the judgment is like it you know that
there's all kinds of I think their words
apocryphal stories that are we don't
necessarily know if they're true or not
but like the pottery teacher had to we
had took divided their class and to
divided a class into two groups
you were graded on one piece you better
get really good make one amazing piece
and you all are measured on the volume
the number of pieces that you output
and when looked at the results not only
did the people who made a lot of stuff
make a lot of stuff but it was also way
better and so there's this volume and a
reduction in inhibition when you realize
that you're not being judged and you can
call it flow you can call it lack of
inhibition you can call it
electromagnetic shotgun whatever the
hell you just called it like but well I
don't know what's going on there but
that's certainly a thing and then again
that's an area that to me it's an
important part of the book which is
ultimately part of you know there is
certainly an ego and self-expression and
this is my stamp on the world this is
the lens that Tom wants to bring to
build the new Disney to do the thing
like the best way to do that is you have
to experiment you have to take a lot of
swings in order to feel what your thing
is I talked about a system of
deconstructing I call it dear
deconstruct emulate analyze and repeat
the deconstruction is like looking
what's working for other people
emulate those people and then analyze
what's working for you for them for your
process and what's not and then repeat
and the logical a logical question that
follows is like well wait a minute are
you just gonna then look like everybody
else because you're deconstructing them
analyzing them and no no the repeat is
that's where you get you what you are
because you can only really do you if
you do it a bazillion times and both on
saying that on the positive and the
negative like you only get to be good if
you do it so many times and realize that
hey your skills are getting better but
it's also in the doing that you realize
who you actually are because that's
that's something that comes from in here
so to me the I don't remember how I got
started on this thread but like those
are that that's that's a material
tactical thing that is happening in the
black box that it's not just how did I
start here and get there like what does
give me some stuff and so big big lofty
ideas like creativity is a foundation to
basically your ability to create the
living life that you want so yes
actually painting makes you a better
surgeon
but also like here's how to do it cold
showers matter you know taking care of
yourself the starving artist is a myth
the that you're when you're super high
you're really creative that's you know
that's that's a very short tale to that
so we we got started on the X we're
talking about the corpus callosum
inhibitory impulses which I want to get
back to judgment that's why yeah but
this the notion of art by the pound
I find that story so [__] incredible
I I am so I'm in such violent agreement
with the idea that if you want to do you
you have to do it like a billion times
like you've got a ideas in equal ideas
out I think it's one of the most
important sort of foe math equations in
the world and I used to think that oh
man like I've come along too late you
said you're born in the 70s that's like
an advantage not the [__] I'm born in
the 70s and so let me finish this
thought and I don't want to forget the
Unabomber sure so I'm born in the 70s
[__] like it's too late all the original
ideas have been thought and all that
which is what that's why the Unabomber
was bombing people by the way he thought
that the universities were destroying
this sweet spot of accomplishment where
it's like really [__] hard but it's
doable and he was like universities are
roading that there's gonna be nothing
left and humans can't flourish unless
they're able to do that now I don't know
how the [__] I got there when I was a
kid I had this whole Salieri complex
where if you've seen the movie Amadeus
it was like this guy's whole area who I
think was a real person was cursing God
because he was like why did you make me
just talented enough to realize how much
more talented Mozart is in me and
that'll never be that good and so that
was like this place that I got stuck in
was like oh man like I'm just smart
enough to realize that I'm never going
to be that good or that talented at
something and that like really really
[__] with me and finally being able to
change that story get out of that space
so that you can begin to realize okay
you're gonna take in a lot of ideas you
don't need to worry if you have any
original ideas
you're a synthesizing machine so even if
all you're doing is a new combination of
all these old ideas that's absolutely
fine yeah
and you will create something that is
never seen before and will never be seen
again because you're such the unique
product of your initial wiring the
parents that you were raised with the
environment that you grew up in the time
that you grew up in it all makes for
this really unique cocktail and if you
stop thinking of putting the weight on
your shoulders of having to come up with
something original bring this all back
to the art by the pound yeah if you stop
by trying to create this one [__]
great masterpieces nothing nothing like
this has ever existed before and you
just realize look I I am in a unique
moment as a unique person and I'm going
to stuff my face full of a lot of
different stuff and then I'm just gonna
create and create and create and create
and create and get through the thousands
of bad ideas that you have to get
through I certainly as a writer I felt
that when I first started writing I was
god-awful oh my god and you it's it is
like a law of nature that you have to
write all the really bad ideas to start
getting to some of the good ideas but as
you're doing that in the failure and the
embarrassment and the pain and there is
a lot of psychological pain if you if
you cuz I fancy myself an artist like
that is my self-identity as as an artist
and when you fancy yourself an artist
and you were creating [__] and schlock
but you're really [__] trying man
like I was really trying I was spending
a lot of hours I was not like doing
anything other than really going after
it and so when you're putting yourself
out there and it doesn't come out well
and you're looking at it and you're
judging to forget what anybody else is
saying and you're just like this is
objectively terrible and you know like I
will say I was not being humble it was
objectively terrible and being able to
have a narrative that tells you and in
the book I think you call it make it
till you make it yeah
- just keep going keep making sure yep
art by the pound baby art by the pound
everything that you just said is in the
book like in spades I think it's that
was maybe that I wish I needed I need to
download that so I can play that in my
headphones on my way to my you know -
Oprah so
like that is to me that is just
beautiful everything you described and
let me give you one mind [__] writing a
book about creativity when writing is
not your primary mechanism for
expression I'm just good enough to get
by not good enough to be great it
crushed me and it also saved my ass
interesting so here's how it crushed me
all the same things you just said like I
am NOT fast I'm a slow writer I in you
know a ph.d program and philosophy you
learnt how to write pretty good it's
very technical it's very it's sort of
jargony and and it's just like and
that's not the voice that I have isn't
it and then I wrote a thousand blog
posts on my blog and that helped me
develop my voice then you sit down to
write a book you'd get just good enough
to you know to have the the agent and
the publisher high five and like that we
got a great one and then you're writing
a book about creativity and in a major
thesis again in the book is that the way
to get back to yourself is just to
create and I was I have come to find out
that I've been doing a lot of other work
a lot of work on creativeLIVE and a lot
of work in things that are not native to
me and writing actually had this
profound effect because I got up at you
know 4:30 5:00 in the morning wrote on
weekends and it's been doing this for a
couple years it had the it had the
profound effect of just I'm use the word
cash I'm just it like fixed the broken
part of me that wasn't tapped into my
creativity it was like it was like
therapy and here's the crazy part is I'm
writing how the true this [__] is I'm in
a mode that I'm really not all that
creative right now cuz I got my brain
too many things and the act of just
sitting down and writing every day what
Anne Lamott
in bird by bird calls shitty first
drafts I it was basically like therapy
and so the the act of writing a book of
creating through writing a book about
creativity where I was
reaching all the things I knew but
wasn't actually doing and then I did the
process part of it which is just sitting
down and cranking out shady first drafts
it was like gold it was like a slingshot
that's really interesting so putting
this in context of you becoming one of
the like elite elite photographers and
deciding yet I need something new was
writing the book therapeutic precisely
because it was at that area where it's
like this is really [__] hard
yeah I'm really stretching and I'm
uncomfortable and is this a failure and
you know I traced the the psychology of
the creator oh my god I can't this is
amazing I can't wait to get this idea
out there oh my god this is kind of hard
wait a minute what have I done
you know this sucks I suck you know
that's the low point right and then
you're like okay maybe it's survivable
okay I'm just gonna get it done oh hey
this is kind of good oh my gosh I'm so
proud of this
so that and I I went on that journey
big-time with the book and so it was
like talk to me about going from the the
trough the I suck were past this sucks
we're now at I suck yeah how does the
therapy begin well it takes the whole
thing because you have to take the other
with the bad the actual upswing at the
end there after I suck is you just keep
writing and again writing or fill in the
blank on it is what is it it's very
music though that you started getting
better I don't know and it doesn't
matter and this is the cool part it does
it literally doesn't matter if you just
keep going and then a little glimmer and
then a little more glimmer and then I
improve a thing and then I mean like I
actually said this to myself at like
5:15 in the morning on some Sunday you
know I'm really good at now I'm really
good at typing because I was I had
written to 150,000 words for an 80,000
word book I just like and that's like
that is a terrible thing to be to desire
to be good at maybe and certainly wasn't
on my list of top 100 things to do but
when you're in that mode and you're in
your darkest hour and you're like hey I
got good at typing at least
that to me it's again this just the
doing the work part of it you can
package I would park that in the ten
thousand hours you're getting better and
you're also I'm a big believer in the
book has a bunch about mindset in there
like you start to be able to control
yourself talk if something potentially
really powerfully here though so I'm
gonna have to push you past that if the
answer is it doesn't matter then I want
to give you a chance to maybe reinforce
that and I'm asking this because one
thing that I get a lot is people will
reach out to me they're following me
they're trying to do the things that I
advise them to do about gaining skills
and getting better and applying them and
some percentage of them lose steam
because they're at the this sucks I suck
right so they they hit that part and my
gut instinct would have been what you
need to keep doing is keep going until
you get better and if you find that
you're trying to attack something where
you don't have the prerequisite sort of
underlying ability whatever that is
however much of the equation that is I
don't know but like for me I could
probably get I could get better at
singing I don't think I'll ever be a
beautiful singer so that could be a
limiting self talk and I actually don't
know I've not spent the time but if that
is true that there are just certain
things like you said that we can get
good but maybe we're never gonna be
world-class if they're I have always
assumed that they are stuck there that
either they just haven't continued going
to garner the necessary skills or
they're in a vein where they're never
going to get good enough to for it to be
therapeutic so it is not in my
experience that's simply continuing is
therapeutic but maybe because I've just
never done it so I'd love to know if you
think now reflecting on it if because
your book is well written so if you say
that like sure like there are writers
that are much better I will grant you
that you and I both suffer from the same
things there there are better writers
that existed on this planet but it's
it's well done it's very well done so I
wonder if that's part of the
or if you have a breakthrough moment for
people right now who they're doing
something and and maybe they just need
to keep going even though they're never
going to get to the level that they want
to get to it simple two by two is it
working
do I love it if it's not working you
don't love it the [__] you doing if you
love it and it's not working
keep going if it's working and you don't
love it then you have a question to ask
yourself and then let's say they're two
by two it's it's not working and you
suck it's working in it's just do the
two by two and the answers present
themselves is from a friend of mine
Chris Chris Caleb oh and I think there's
a couple of other folks that have
thought about it so if you are finding
joy and you or if you're not finding joy
because it just gets so hard but you
believe there's value then keep going
have you read grit by Angela Duckworth
40 pages of it oh man it's worth it
finish it yeah there's there's a really
cool part in there because this is where
so my whole no [__] what would it
take right getting beyond the platitudes
and all that or getting to like the real
sort of the the ugly parts and being
able to push past those she talks about
part of grit is its passion and tenacity
over time and a lot of times people will
get really into something at the
beginning and then they quit and they
just tell themselves well this is one of
the two pi2 is I wasn't enjoying it and
so then they go to the next thing and
they're really into it for a minute and
then they're like I'm just not enjoying
it and they go to the next thing not
enjoying it not enjoying it not enjoying
it and she said at some point this is a
you problem
this isn't a truly like oh this is just
you found another thing you don't enjoy
this is a you succumbing to the friction
of like this is also hard yeah and it's
it's kind of like when people mistake
being thirsty for being hungry and so
they just keep eating when a glass of
water would have done the trick
yeah and what do you say to people who
they keep hitting the oh this I just
like it I don't like it I don't like it
I would tend to agree with her that
there is a point where it's a new
problem I think that point is pretty far
down the road for most people especially
if the reason if you got better at
starting things that you thought you
might like because I think if you're if
you're starting things you might like
and you realize that you hate everything
it's pretty clear it's a you problem
it's rare to me that I've again having
been somewhat of a counselor or a career
adviser or whatever if through through
distance universe with creativeLIVE
where tens of millions of people have
learned stuff or in my own tribe I think
it's I find that when people turn to
things their first couple swings are
usually things that they should or ought
to do would be helpful or valuable or
all these things that culture has
program them their parents or whatever
oh you're creative great why don't you
create a really cool and very valuable
company around computer programming
whatever versus the thing that they
actually love and that goes back to my
you know your you your correct assertion
that I'm big on intuition and that's it
the book is called creative calling not
for an accident because it's we do have
this calling and it's in there we've
tapped into what it feels like before
and my experience with people who will
come to me with the problem that you're
posing right now which is like you know
I just I start and then I just and I
start and I'm here you know it's like
you think you're starting in the wrong
place well you take a little another
beat and the answers aren't out here
somewhere your mom's not gonna tell you
what you're good at
in fact your mom's probably gonna be the
worst advisor mom dad close friends
brothers sisters it's it's very hard to
get really good advice from that subset
of humans
best stuff is this quiet internal you
know compass that we have and I think we
get there not with a map but with a
compass and that compass arrow is going
as you walk around the corner the
compass arrow points over there but the
trail doesn't go over there
give me the reality what that is in real
life and so we don't get anywhere in a
straight line but I'm saying so you've
got a compass what's it pointing out
what's the Noir
that it's wobbling towards I would say
you know in your heart it's the thing
it's pointing at your heart and you've
got yourself close enough you're on the
path and you started walking on this
path and was pointing due north and for
a while it was straight and then it you
had to diverge from that path and you
saw if you were paying you're just
walking and then you look down and
you're like oh [__] my troop my heart
says I should go a little bit left
hard core thesis about this so cool
curious to see what you think so I think
people many many people at least in
their adult lives they don't want
anything and I think that wanting is it
is a process I don't think that were
born with really strong wants so for
instance I want to be a filmmaker and I
would not have wanted to be a filmmaker
600 years ago or a thousand years ago
that would never have occurred to me
right because it didn't exist so I think
that we are born with a propensity to
desire but I don't think that that is
pointed at anything in particular
whatsoever sure and I think that you
have to cultivate it so you gave the
analogy earlier of you have this little
spark and you blow air on it and it's
it's gonna burn brighter I think the big
problem is people don't know how to make
that little ember one they don't know
how to hear it so the the intuition the
voice actually I may be with you on that
one
I think that most people hear a whisper
and they just they're not able to
connect that oh I could make something
meaningful out of shirt as the
programming says that whisper
naive ignorant not the thing you should
be doing it's not practical it's not all
those lists of things so they hear it
and then the programming shuts it down
and the book is trying to get you to
know know that that is gold that little
thing that's gold is it weird great
whatever may be weird as a kid is gonna
make you great as an adult it's
interesting what ever made you weird as
a kid that's James victori whatever made
you weird as a kids make you make you
great now so look at your look into the
weirdness wait what were you sort of
afraid of our ashamed of your whatever
and you know for me I loved
of performing I loved helping create a
narrative taking people on a ride as a
first second grader I used to tell jokes
and do magic in front of my class and
then I overheard my second-grade teacher
tell my mom at an open house that chases
way better at sports than he is at art
and I was like okay later art I'm gonna
go to the thing that I'm getting I'm
gonna get rewarded for and like I don't
know just III think you're picking up
when I'm putting down that that we have
these it's it's inside of us we can
listen to it we're told not to and I'm
trying to build up enough of a callus
enough of a muscle and awareness and
basically some hutzpah to actually do
the thing to disappoint to be willing to
disappoint all the other people in your
life in order to do the thing that
you're supposed to do because when you
do that thing when you're on your path
and you're listening to that call and if
the call is not always loud and it's not
always right in front of you but it's
always there get good at the inside part
that that is an incredibly valuable
process and I grew through so diving in
though this [__] is complicated
construed it takes a lot of [__] time
yeah you have to make money you have to
eat you have to pay rent
sure it usually starts as a whisper so
the the quote-unquote calling is and
I'll flash you back to when I was a kid
okay
I loved video games and now kids today
that's like yeah you can be a
millionaire playing video games dude
back in the 80s
you were a [__] bonehead and you're
Terry 16-hundred yeah I got it
hit pitfall not yet exactly so it was
just a different a different time yeah
and so the whisker eight bit yes even
before that Jesus worse yeah but the
whisper in my mind was always like oh
well I would love to play video games
that would be rad like if I could make a
living playing video games I would be
the happiest person alive so that's the
whisper that I hear then it's when I
think about trying to make a living
though I'm like oh [__] like yes of
disappoint my parents so that's already
a big thing check the whole world thinks
that you are [__] if you're pursuing
that because there's no logical path to
making money doing that and when you
start thinking about like whoa like how
would I make a living how would I really
face down all the disappointment and
stuff it gets really hard to move
forward because it's not this burning
desire and that's why I think a big part
of this is people have to figure out
like what are you gonna choose to make
the burning desire so maybe part of what
we can follow the path of you going so
far down the athletic road so you
overhear that comment you decide to do
something you're getting rewarded for
and I'm sure you got rewarded more and
more and more you said you got into
photography because so many people are
taking pictures of you were so [__]
good at soccer yeah so it's like that's
a lot of rewards so you get how that
then becomes like this intensified
magnified desire so the question is how
do you do that when you're not getting
rewarded so you have a little [__]
whisper in your heart you still have to
eat but like how are you going to like
fan those flames because no one in the
outsider is gonna fan those flames for
you for sure they're gonna throw mud
right so what is your recommendation for
people who they hear the whisper and it
does not feel like a calling it feels
like a [__] whisper and they're not
getting any external reward for it yet
don't betray yourself
I stand big in the word betrayal and I
think you ignore your suppress your
creativity it's a betrayal and that
calling and you know I think about it in
terms of I made a film I think I was
either seven or eight it's called the
Sons of Zorro washed washed cars on the
neighborhood raised enough money to buy
film to borrow a neighbor's camera to
shoot direct act and my first film
screened it made money and I remember
thinking God wouldn't it be cool tip if
I could just do this I mean I was like
eight like why would I do anything but
this like my parents say that money is
good I had to work really hard doing
things I didn't really love washing cars
in order to do this and when I had money
I did this and I made money
I mean this is like little
eight-year-old entrepreneur right and I
just think of I nearly betrayed that kid
because I got caught up as everyone does
in the sheds the aughts the musts and
those are everybody else's sheds odds
and musts I got pulled in to know I
enjoyed sports but it was a pressure to
keep going even when I didn't want to
keep going I got sucked in to medical
school because it's prestigious no it
costs me a hundred grand to not do it I
got pulled into graduate school in
philosophy because there was another way
to become sort of a half doctor a PhD
instead of the MD and all of these
things were basically society's way of
they were negotiating the thing that I
like derivation zuv the thing that I
really wanted to do and I just couldn't
say it out loud because I felt ashamed I
felt scared
I felt I didn't want to disappoint the
people that were closest to me notice
that I have all the privilege that we
talked about earlier so if you're not me
white male how much even harder it would
be to pursue those things if you can tap
into that even for a moment and do the
thing that the answer to your question
is show don't tell if someone you love's
sees you doing the thing and you get joy
you don't have to say like this overt
outward declaration I'm going to become
a youtuber you're like you are a surgeon
what are you doing we have a mortgage
our house is 10,000 bucks a month are
blah blah blah blah like if you just
started making videos and sharing them
within the doctor community or whatever
community wanted to make videos at first
it what are you doing Marv and they're
like Marv that's a pretty good video
Marv you have thousands of people
watching your videos and then you said
you know what I want to actually turn on
my ad monetization on YouTube and he
started earning money like Marv's now
making money on YouTube Marv is the the
you know this the sir
for the Seahawks what show don't tell if
you're really and I think we all are
especially folks that are they've
painted themselves in the corner where
they're uncomfortable having a
conversation with your parents or your
friends or your spouse or your whatever
and if you've done that then the
conversation on changing your lifestyle
pursuing a different thing following
your passion your dream is so obvious
and you've done something for yourself
as well you've figured out that it's not
some whimsical thing that you're just
like I'm bored of being a doctor so I'm
gonna make youtube videos up and then
you do something else two weeks later
and something else two weeks later show
don't tell it's interesting I have a
slightly different mantra on that cool
Show and Tell ooh
so oh I get it I had to go there didn't
ya I'm there again I think people have
to like the realities of trying to get
something made and all that is you have
to tell everybody what you're up to like
if people are gonna be able to help you
and you were certainly gonna need just
an unimaginable amount of help if you're
gonna pull something big off and even
though in the beginning a lot of times
you're gonna lose credibility with
people you're not going to gain
credibility like when I first started
telling people we're gonna build the
next Disney people weren't like yeah you
are they were like that's [__] absurd
what are you doing like you already have
this big company it's thriving why the
[__] would you leave like it just seemed
like utter madness to people yeah and I
fully understand there there are times
in a person's life where they're not
ready to push back against that they're
not ready to disappoint people probably
largely in their youth maybe they
haven't quite suffered enough if I'm
that suffering like being unhappy is not
a game that I like to play so it's
possible I have a low threshold for that
understanding your personality type is a
very good thing understanding if you're
hyper agreeable which I am by nature so
I had to fight against that and so in
forcing myself to push back against my
agree ability I swung very hard in the
other direction and so now I have
absolutely no problem being disagreeable
but when I first started telling people
that we're gonna build the next Disney
and I talked about the plan and how
we're gonna go about it it
I even now I still lose credibility and
part of why I posted it on the website
was so that when I execute against that
people be like whoa what the [__] like
he called this 15 20 years ago and then
the other part is I need help so it's
like for
if you're able to shut people out which
not everybody's going to figure out
where you are having self-awareness to
figure out what's gonna work for you at
this moment if you need to be under the
radar beam at the [__] radar sure but
at a certain point to really supercharge
what you're doing or get people to glom
on and to come be a part of your dream
you're gonna have to [__] tell people
and I that I cover that transition that
we just went through in the book and I
think it's very wise for you to say it
because the show don't tell
that is a very narrow period where you
have filled with self-doubt and you're
especially sensitive around the people
that are close to you because if you
flip the script and you're Marv's wife
and you've you've grown yourself
accustomed to a certain lifestyle or
Marv's kids like they want to go to
private school or fill in the like I'm
being as cliche as possible yeah but now
you talking about the real traps yeah
and the reality is that if they see you
doing something that threatens them it
will create fear and so the fear if
maybe if it's a kid like oh my gosh
what's dad doing and in the spouse like
maybe she burned up her dreams and so
she's worried about you actually tapping
into yours in a jealousy sort of way and
those are there's a lot of psychology in
there so they don't have to unpack all
of it but that I do like the showing
first because you're not just showing
them you're also showing yourself
there's some tipping point where
screaming what you're doing from the
mountaintops is so valuable and that
goes into the community part and when
you like I anytime you you share a video
and I see it and I'm snapping that heart
or the like or the comment or congrats
they did a million subs like I'm I'm on
I'm along for the ride on you making the
next Disney like and that's the effect
that it has because people want to
connect with something they want to be a
part of something bigger than themselves
and that's a very powerful vehicle that
is a it's like I call it the talk about
it being this pull you know you the
tractor beam you just so it's like oh my
gosh it's a it's a movement you know and
that's part of what I'm trying to unpack
around
creativity is okay you have it's great
nice book but I will bet all of the
money in my bank account that the
concept of creativity especially as
machines continue to elevate and the
role their role in our culture that
things like creativity become extra
interesting so this is only gonna
accelerate dude have you seen the AI
painting selling
yes that is what do you think about that
I think it's interesting I think the
still a long way to go how'd you get
into that could you pay for a painting
created by AI not really only because I
like to have a connection with the the
piece and/or the artist it's interesting
because some part of my mind does flash
to who wrote this algorithm because I
feel now a little bit connected to them
yeah actually really get into it like if
it was especially there's something so
[__] interesting to me if there's
like the sense of the ghost in the
machine well it's like it feels soulful
and you're looking at it like this
[__] moves me like a holy [__] this
is made by AI so it is I try I try to
temper my enthusiasm for because I fully
recognize the potential problems yeah
but yet it is very interesting to see
where AI is gonna creep into will it
creep into the creative domain well that
well for sure the last place but it does
feel like it's I'm getting asked to
consult on stuff like that really tell
me more not too much other to say about
it but that just because I can't what
would they want you to do and I don't
know if you can come into this but so
this is the philosophy of photography
right like mom I posited in creating the
first iPhone app that shared photos to
social networks to a touch of a single
button oh yes and it's called best
camera and it was scoffed it was laughed
out the door and I said no no the best
camera is one that's with you it's not
about the quality the megapixel photos
are about stories and moments it's not
about dynamic range or the the
megapixels and in the future everyone's
gonna have a camera and it's not gonna
be about like the photos that are
hanging in museums and on gallery walls
are actually going to be a sloppy
approximation of what culture is
actually saying
and what culture is saying is gonna be
captured in the snapshot and you're
gonna see it in things like best camera
where you have a real-time feed of
images just to be ticktick to qualify
this I had to get special permission
because there hadn't been a feed of
images in Apple software and they were
worried that the concept of a feed was
not something that they could stand
behind feet they didn't yet if the
concept of a photo feed in an app didn't
exist and this was real-time you could
see it unfolding in around the world and
I remember I launched it in September it
did go on to become a half of the year
and in on New Year's Eve in September
2009 the real power hit me which is I am
watching culture unfold in real time all
over the world I'm watching firework
shows in Tokyo and in Auckland and then
before they're happening where I am we
are predicting trends I can tell what
the colors are what but things that are
like photographs of people and fashion
and they're like it just was like a
kaboom so don't get too too rathole here
but the philosophy of photography being
able to say own and not only are we
going to be taking pictures and
everyone's going to have it but we're
also going to be using photography to
find out where we parked our car in the
airport
we're taking pictures of receipts and
we're gonna be taking you know and and
if there are 7106 languages which that's
the current number that's a real number
yeah there's one that is universal it's
photography you might be able to argue
that music is universal but I can show
you a photograph of a new mother with a
new baby doesn't matter where you're
from color of your skin your sexual
orientation nothing your identity you
instantly get it and so I like that
photography is this universal language I
wanted to get into that and to me that
is part of what put me into the position
to be thinking and talking about what is
the future not just of AI and art it's
like I'm less involved in the painting
side in one the future of photography
side cameras everywhere kind of world I
think that's fascinating equally
fascinating Jack Ma
founder of Alibaba arguably one of the
most data-centric
you know it's like mega Amazon basically
like if you listen to his speech at the
World Economic Forum last year he said
my kids they don't learn computer
programming that's for computers my kids
creativity painting movement human
connection all the soft skills Wow
this is from Jack Ma it's a fascinating
you can just look it up Jack Ma or all
that kind of form creativity it'll blow
your mind it's like 90 seconds long and
he basically lays out that you would
think he'd be saying computers you know
no computers their computers are
currently writing their own software a
robotic arm when one hand bumps into
something and it didn't predict that
that was going to happen it writes the
software on the code that tells the
other arm hey next time you bump into it
here's how you should treat it that's
writing code on the fly so writing code
just Bad's yesteryear man creativity
that's next year yeah that's it's
interesting I'm very surprised that Jack
Ma of all people is saying that I would
think that that it would almost become
de rigueur that people would be able to
code like that the the ability to
manipulate a computer is where you want
to end up because even if computers are
writing their own code if you don't
understand what they're doing you're
more likely to be taken advantage of it
but do you need to understand how your
water gets to your faucet yes
so this do back to do really I'll make a
very bold statement electricity do you
work do you really wonder another thing
that you want to be in control of you
must understand how it works at a
fundamental level this is why I'm
obsessed with the brain it may be a
weird thing of wiring in me this may not
be universal but I will tell you this
once I understand something at a
biological level at at a Newtonian level
right I may never get to the licensed
Indian level I certainly may not get to
the quantum level okay but when you get
to an approximation that's close enough
that gives you a visual image that you
can hold on to which allows you to then
because when you can manipulate the
image you can manipulate certainly the
story sure so when I understand like
take meditation once I understood oh I'm
trying to get out of the sympathetic
nervous system into the pair of
that ik diaphragm breathing for whatever
reason is an evolutionarily designed
trigger this is a seesaw effect you
can't be in the sympathetic and the
parasympathetic at the same time so
anything I do physiologically that pulls
me over to the parasympathetic aah now I
know how to meditate I actually
understand what I'm doing okay and so
once I understand that same thing with
exercise right once I understand the ATP
system in mitochondria then I understand
what I'm trying to do with the exercise
and wonder why I understand why hit
cardio is important so it's like I'm not
a [__] plumber so no I don't need to
know how water gets to my tap so that
one I'm just gonna take it take for
granted
okay but I could be manipulated by a
plumber if nobody else sure and if a
computer [__] speaks the language but
I don't speak and they're doing all
kinds of crazy [__] it does feel like
I'm more likely to be caught off guard
by something so going back to the great
hack if you don't understand how your
data is being collected so I had a guy
named Brian Johnson on impact theory and
he was like Tom I need to come on the
show I need to tell people that like
data should be a universal human right
it's gonna be the most monetizable asset
ever like in all of human history what
you do as a data will be they'll
eventually be able to turn it into a
brain basically your brain all of your
behaviors will boil down to these things
that are programmable into a neural
network or whatever it's ultimately
gonna be and then if somebody wanted to
essentially rent your brain if you don't
control that if you don't control the
data upon which that is built then
somebody else is going to control that
information I thought what the [__] like
that had never occurred to me and so I
thought Jesus you want to talk about
something where I'd I literally didn't
spend a second thinking about what my
data was worth and what it could lead to
so in terms of like I love there's
there's a romantic nature to like my
kids are learning movement and human
connection and that's rad that like that
is rad and if you don't do that just
you're never gonna have like a kind of
life if you want to have sure but man it
feels like there's other things there's
so much technology you take for granted
that you don't even have that picture of
that is sadly for sure right so like
you're just you're then you're [__]
because then you're paralyzed
I know that I have a flag if I need to
go to the airport pretty soon I gotta
fly at 7:25 can I get to Burbank like
how far is Burbank from Burbank will
take you 40 minutes okay
yeah we had to we gotta be set we're
nearing the end we are yeah so but I
just use flying for example as you
understand
maybe the Simplot picture is so simple
that when you accelerate and you create
a wing that's a certain shape that air
moves underneath faster than it moves
over the top which very it's a lift I
guess what I'm saying is there are
certain things that will meet a
threshold of importance flying probably
not one of them computers maybe if
computers end up being the thing that
run everything but all right with that
I'll stop there just because I know that
we have to get you to the airport but
man tell people where they can find your
wonderful foundational book awesome
it's available anywhere you buy books
and also at creative calling there's a
few packages right now I don't know when
we're gonna build route this episode but
if you want some special stuff we're
gonna do some professional a special
class where I'm creative live for the
people who purchase the book but just
conceptually wherever you buy books
thank you for supporting me and the book
it's been a labor of love it's been
years in the making and I think create
creativity is it's it's powerful
medicine well said very very well said I
love the format of the show man Thank
You Man I want to keep going if only you
didn't have to get in a giant flying bus
I know it's so sad but like two hours
one's a man [__] goes fast isn't that
crazy
yes very alright everybody thank you for
joining us go get the book it's really
fantastic
everything you've done has been amazing
dude I've loved following your career
everything your photography is [__]
ridiculous
but honestly creativeLIVE is is a
testament to what you're trying to bring
to the world so this is the why I
realized I was built I became a creator
identified as it I started building
tools the iPhone app about the platform
for people to learn the book is house
like it's the instruction manual for
putting a lot of [__] together it's the
why I love it there it is go get it
thank you brother thank you
I have never seen or felt the world more
alive the people around me more alive
than when they are doing the thing that
makes them feel great